.\" Man page for az-ai — Azure OpenAI CLI (v2)
.\" Install preview: man -l man/az-ai.1
.\" This is a stub; the canonical reference is `az-ai --help`.
.TH AZ-AI 1 "2026-04-22" "az-ai 2.0.x" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
az-ai \- Azure OpenAI command-line client (Microsoft Agent Framework)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B az-ai
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.RI [ prompt ]
.br
.B echo
.RI \(dq prompt \(dq
|
.B az-ai
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B az-ai
is a silent-by-design, scripting-friendly client for Azure OpenAI
deployments. It is designed to compose with pipes, Espanso, AutoHotkey,
and CI pipelines: when standard output is not a TTY (or when
.B \-\-raw
is set), it emits only model content \(em no spinner, no color, no
progress chrome.
.PP
The full flag reference lives in
.B az-ai \-\-help
and in the repository at
.IR docs/accessibility.md .
This man page documents the most frequently used options and the
stable scripting contract (environment, exit codes).
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-\-model ", " \-m " " \fIALIAS\fR|\fINAME\fR
Model deployment or alias. Env:
.BR AZUREOPENAIMODEL .
.TP
.BR \-\-temperature ", " \-t " " \fIFLOAT\fR
Sampling temperature in 0.0\(en2.0. Default 0.55.
.TP
.BI \-\-max\-tokens " INT"
Maximum completion tokens. Default 10000.
.TP
.BI \-\-timeout " SECONDS"
Request timeout in seconds. Default 120.
.TP
.BR \-\-system ", " \-s " " \fITEXT\fR
System prompt. Env:
.BR SYSTEMPROMPT .
.TP
.B \-\-raw
Suppress all non-content output. No ANSI, no spinner, no stderr chrome.
Recommended for Espanso, AutoHotkey, shell pipelines, screen readers,
and high-latency SSH. Byte-stable across minor releases.
.TP
.B \-\-json
Emit machine-readable JSON (errors and estimator output).
.TP
.BI \-\-persona " NAME"
Route the prompt through a named persona (or
.B auto
for keyword routing).
.TP
.B \-\-agent
Enable agent mode with tool calling. See
.BR \-\-tools ", " \-\-max\-rounds .
.TP
.B \-\-ralph
Enable Ralph mode (autonomous loop). See
.BR \-\-validate ", " \-\-task\-file ", " \-\-max\-iterations .
.TP
.B \-\-estimate
Print estimated USD cost for the prompt and exit (no API call).
.TP
.BR \-\-help ", " \-h
Print the full help text and exit.
.TP
.BR \-\-version ", " \-v
Print version. Add
.B \-\-short
for a bare semver line.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B AZUREOPENAIENDPOINT
Azure OpenAI endpoint URL. Required.
.TP
.B AZUREOPENAIAPI
API key. Required.
.TP
.B AZUREOPENAIMODEL
Default model/alias. Optional.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Any non-empty value disables ANSI color output, unconditionally. See
.UR https://no-color.org/
.UE .
.TP
.B TERM
When set to
.BR dumb ,
color is disabled (Emacs shell, legacy consoles).
.TP
.BR CLICOLOR ", " CLICOLOR_FORCE
BSD color conventions.
.B CLICOLOR=0
disables color and beats
.BR FORCE_COLOR .
.TP
.B FORCE_COLOR
Force color even when stdout is not a TTY. Loses to
.B NO_COLOR
and
.BR CLICOLOR=0 .
.TP
.B AZ_TELEMETRY
.RB "Equivalent to " \-\-telemetry .
Opt-in OpenTelemetry + FinOps events on stderr.
.TP
.BR AZ_CACHE ", " AZ_CACHE_TTL_HOURS
Opt-in prompt cache (see
.BR \-\-cache ).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Generic error (unexpected exception, validation failure).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (unknown flag, missing argument).
.TP
.B 130
Interrupted by SIGINT (Ctrl-C). POSIX-standard.
.PP
See
.I docs/accessibility.md
\(sc3 for the full exit-code table, including Ralph-mode sentinel codes
(42\(en45) and cache-path codes.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ./.azureopenai\-cli.json
Project-local configuration.
.TP
.I ~/.azureopenai\-cli.json
User configuration. Precedence: env > CLI flag > project file > user file.
.TP
.I ~/.azureopenai\-cli/cache/
Prompt-cache directory (when
.B \-\-cache
is active).
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Ask a question:
.PP
.RS
.B az-ai \(dqWhat is the capital of France?\(dq
.RE
.PP
Pipe input; emit only model content (screen-reader / SSH safe):
.PP
.RS
.B echo \(dqsummarize this\(dq | az-ai \-\-raw
.RE
.PP
Persona routing with explicit model:
.PP
.RS
.B az-ai \-\-persona coder \-\-model fast \(dqreview this function\(dq
.RE
.PP
CI cost-gate (no network call):
.PP
.RS
.B az-ai \-\-estimate \-\-json \(dq$prompt\(dq
.RE
.SH ACCESSIBILITY
.B az-ai
is designed to be usable with screen readers, braille displays, and
low-bandwidth terminals. See
.I docs/accessibility.md
for the color, TTY, and
.B \-\-raw
contracts; see
.I docs/accessibility/keyboard\-workflows.md
for keyboard-only usage patterns.
.SH BUGS
Accessibility bugs are triaged at the same severity as crashes. Report
via the channels in
.IR SECURITY.md .
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR env (1),
.BR man (1),
.BR pipe (7),
.BR espanso (1).
.PP
.I docs/accessibility.md ,
.I docs/accessibility/keyboard\-workflows.md ,
.I docs/accessibility/tty\-detection.md ,
.I docs/espanso\-ahk\-integration.md ,
.UR https://no-color.org/
.UE ,
.UR https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/
.UE .
.SH AUTHORS
The Azure OpenAI CLI contributors. Accessibility steward: Mickey Abbott.
.PP
.I Us little guys gotta stick together.
